So we've seen in the last lecture how we can allow other developers to hook into our themes code. We call
do_action() and then other developers can add actions to this hook. WordPress actually implements the
same concept in the WordPress core.
Let's take a look at the WordPress source code you will find a lot of do_action() calls. And in the same way this
will allow us plugin and theme developers to interact with the WordPress core.
So for example there's an action called "plugins_loaded"
and you can define a function that will run once WordPress loads the plugins.
You can also run a function when WordPress first initialized with the "init" action.
Some other actions accept arguments. For example there is an action called "save_posts" which obviously runs
when you save a post. And inside your function you can actually get some arguments so in "save_post()" you
get the $post_id and the actual $post object.
So you can do something here with these variables.
Let's make sure when you have more than one argument you must pass the number of arguments as the fourth
parameter in add_action().
So the second one is the priority and the default is 10 and this is the number of arguments. For more
than one arguments
you must specify this. So 2
in our case. There are tons of actions that are included in the WordPress core in fact if we search for "action
reference".
You'll find this page and it includes all the actions that are included in the WordPress core. So we can actually
do pretty much everything you would like to do to interact with the WordPress core. And in the same way
we can hook into the WordPress core to add some code.
WordPress can actually also hook into our theme in order to add some stuff. And we actually already did that.
Remember in the header.php file we call the function called wp_head(). And what wp_head()
actually is,
it's a function that, let's take a look at it.
It's a function that will actually call an action called "wp_head". So wp_head() actually calls
do_action( 'wp_head' ).
All right?
So remember in the when we view the page source and we found that wp_head() added some stuff here, some
scripts and some CSS. And the way this is actually possible is by WordPress registering some new
functions to the wp_head hook in the WordPress core.
So to further understand this let's search for the "wp_head hook". And I think it's this one.You'll
find here
that WordPress in the core of the WordPress. WordPress actually injects some functions the
"wp_head" hook.
So these functions are actually responsible for displaying the stuff that we see here. And that's why coding
wp_head() in your theme is mandatory. Because WordPress actually uses this hook to inject some stuff.
in your theme. So let's actually try to use this hook here.
So I'm gonna remove this "save_post" and let's skip the function name. It's not important for now.
Then let's echo some
maybe a STYLE tag.
And let's change
the background color of the body.
And let's make it important. So we can make sure we will.
As you can see let's refresh the page source. I'm not sure  if you can see, we've injected some CSS STYLE tags using the
wp_head() function.
So you might be wondering why haven't we done that.
instead when we were enqueuing our CSS files instead of the enqueue "wp_enqueue_scripts" action.
And the reason is that wp_enqueue_scripts does more than just injecting the script in the HEAD
tag. It's actually responsible for making sure also no duplicate styles are included and
the dependencies are included and the versions and all that stuff.
So this is the proper way to add styles and scripts to WordPress.
You should never do that.
Right?
So I hope it's now clear that we can hook into the WordPress actions that are already defined by Wordpress
and you have a list here.
And WordPress actually can hook into our theme by calling functions like
the wp_head() and the wp_footer() also.
So one more thing I want to clarify in the actions, you can not just to echo something like we've done
so far,
you can actually run any kind of PHP script.
So for example we have an action called "pre_get_posts", all right?
And what that action does? Remember in the when we were discussing the wp_query and we said that we
have a global variable that holds all these posts that will loop through,
right?
And all these posts are retrieved using a function called get_posts(). If you don't remember that
you can go back to the lecture where we discussed the loop.
So "pre_get_posts" actually allows you to do something before calling get_posts().
So what you can do
is you can modify the global  $wp_query object before getting the post. So you can change the get_post() function
behavior.
So this action gets the $query as a parameter. And inside a function you can do whatever you want with
the $query object, modify, change some stuff in it.
I just wanna search for the "wp query class" and show you how WordPress actually implements actions in the core. So we have the
source code for the WP_Query class here. Let's view it.
And let's search for get_post.
Here it is.
So this is the get_post() function that is responsible for getting the post according to the query as we discussed
before.
And here is the "pre_get_posts" action. So WordPress is actually calling do_action()
and this is another way to call do_action().
The difference is just this one allows you to pass an array of parameters here.
So the array of parameters here is $this. And $this here refers to the current instance of WP_Query. And that's
actually what we get past here this $query.
So this filter will run before calling
get_posts() for any wp_query loop, right?
So after modifying this, WordPress will go and use the modified one that you actually modified using
the action.
So what we can do is maybe you can check
if the query is main query.
Remember the difference between main query and a secondary query. So if it's a main query
let's
set the
maybe the "posts_per_page"
to 2.
Let's see what will happen.
So in our main query we only have two  posts now.
So you can actually use this "pre_get_posts" action later in an advanced section in this course. It could be useful
to implement and advance search or any feature that we're required to, you know, change the behavior of the query.
Another thing I want to point out is there is a function called remove_query, remove_action(), sorry, that
will remove a certain or unregister a certain function from an action.
So maybe we as theme developers added some action and somebody another developer needs to remove
it to override that. So he can call a remove_action() and the action name and also the function name.
Let's also make sure that if you call add_action() with arguments with let's say priority and the
number of arguments, you should do the exactly same arguments for the remove_action(). Otherwise it won't
work.
You might be wondering
we are calling these add_action() hooks in the functions.php file which is actually inside our theme.
So what's the point of that?
This way we're also modifying the theme.
So if another developer's needs to interact with some action hook,he needs to modify functions.php
which is actually modifying the theme,
right?
And the answer to this is actually other developers won't have to add these add_action() calls in
functions.php, they can add it in what referred to as child themes. And we'll take a look at child themes
in a couple of lectures.